Chapter 7. Helm's Deep



The sun was already westering as they rode from Edoras, and the light
of it was in their eyes, turning all the rolling fields of Rohan to a golden
haze. There was a beaten way, north-westward along the foot-hills of the
White Mountains, and this they followed, up and down in a green country,
crossing small swift streams by many fords. Far ahead and to their right the
Misty Mountains loomed; ever darker and taller they grew as the miles went
by. The sun went slowly down before them. Evening came behind.

The host rode on. Need drove them. Fearing to come too late, they rode
with all the speed they could, pausing seldom. Swift and enduring were the
steeds of Rohan, but there were many leagues to go. Forty leagues and more
it was, as a bird flies, from Edoras to the fords of the Isen, where they
hoped to find the king’s men that held back the hosts of Saruman.

Night closed about them. At last they halted to make their camp. They
had ridden for some five hours and were far out upon the western plain, yet
more than half their journey lay still before them. In a great circle, under
the starry sky and the waxing moon, they now made their bivouac. They lit no
fires, for they were uncertain of events; but they set a ring of mounted
guards about them, and scouts rode out far ahead, passing like shadows in
the folds of the land. The slow night passed without tidings or alarm. At
dawn the horns sounded, and within an hour they took the road again.

There were no clouds overhead yet, but a heaviness was in the air; it
was hot for the season of the year. The rising sun was hazy, and behind it,
following it slowly up the sky, there was a growing darkness, as of a great
storm moving out of the East. And away in the North-west there seemed to be
another darkness brooding about the feet of the Misty Mountains, a shadow
that crept down slowly from the Wizard's Vale.

Gandalf dropped back to where Legolas rode beside Eomer. ’You have the
keen eyes of your fair kindred, Legolas,’ he said; ’and they can tell a
sparrow from a finch a league off. Tell me, can you sec anything away yonder
towards Isengard?’

’Many miles lie between,’ said Legolas, gazing thither and shading his
eyes with his long hand. ’I can see a darkness. There are shapes moving in
it, great shapes far away upon the bank of the river; but what they are I




cannot tell. It is not mist or cloud that defeats my eyes: there is a
veiling shadow that some power lays upon the land, and it marches slowly
down stream. It is as if the twilight under endless trees were flowing
downwards from the hills.'

'And behind us comes a very storm of Mordor,' said Gandalf. 'It will be
a black night.'

As the second day of their riding drew on, the heaviness in the air
increased. In the afternoon the dark clouds began to overtake them: a sombre
canopy with great billowing edges flecked with dazzling light. The sun went
down, blood-red in a smoking haze. The spears of the Riders were tipped with
fire as the last shafts of light kindled the steep faces of the peaks of
Thrihyrne: now very near they stood on the northernmost arm of the White
Mountains, three jagged horns staring at the sunset. In the last red glow
men in the vanguard saw a black speck, a horseman riding back towards them.
They halted awaiting him.

He came, a weary man with dinted helm and cloven shield. Slowly he
climbed from his horse and stood there a while gasping. At length he spoke.

'Is Eomer here?' he asked. 'You come at last, but too late, and with too
little strength. Things have gone evilly since Theodred fell. We were driven
back yesterday over the Isen with great loss; many perished at the crossing.
Then at night fresh forces came over the river against our camp. All
Isengard must be emptied; and Saruman has armed the wild hillmen and
herd-folk of Dunland beyond the rivers, and these also he loosed upon us. We
were overmastered. The shield- wall was broken. Erkenbrand of Westfold has
drawn off those men he could gather towards his fastness in Helm's Deep. The
rest are scattered.

'Where is Eomer? Tell him there is no hope ahead. He should return to
Edoras before the wolves of Isengard come there.' Theoden had sat silent,
hidden from the man's sight behind his guards; now he urged his horse
forward. 'Come, stand before me, Ceorl!' he said. 'I am here. The last host
of the Eorlingas has ridden forth. It will not return without battle.'

The man's face lightened with joy and wonder. He drew himself up. Then
he knelt, offering his notched sword to the king. 'Command me, lord!' he
cried. 'And pardon me! I thought—'

'You thought I remained in Meduseld bent like an old tree under winter
snow. So it was when you rode to war. But a west wind has shaken the
boughs,' said Theoden. 'Give this man a fresh horse! Let us ride to the help




of Erkenbrand!'

While Theoden was speaking, Gandalf rode a short way ahead, and he sat
there alone, gazing north to Isengard and west to the setting sun. Now he
came back.

'Ride, Theoden!' he said. 'Ride to Helm's Deep! Go not to the Fords of
Isen, and do not tarry in the plain! I must leave you for a while. Shadowfax
must bear me now on a swift errand.' Turning to Aragorn and Eomer and the
men of the king's household, he cried: 'Keep well the Lord of the Mark, till
I return. Await me at Helm's Gate! Farewell!'

He spoke a word to Shadowfax, and like an arrow from the bow the great
horse sprang away. Even as they looked he was gone: a flash of silver in the
sunset, a wind over the grass, a shadow that fled and passed from sight.
Snowmane snorted and reared, eager to follow; but only a swift bird on the
wing could have overtaken him.

'What does that mean?' said one of the guard to Hama.

'That Gandalf Greyhame has need of haste,' answered Hama. 'Ever he goes
and comes unlooked-for:'

'Wormtongue, were he here, would not find it hard to explain 'Said the
other.

'True enough,' said Hama; 'but for myself, I will wait until I see
Gandalf again.'

'Maybe you will wait long,' said the other.

The host turned away now from the road to the Fords of Isen and bent
their course southward. Night fell, and still they rode on. The hills drew
near, but the tall peaks of Thrihyrne were already dim against the darkening
sky. Still some miles away, on the far side of the Westfold Vale, lay a
green coomb, a great bay in the mountains, out of which a gorge opened in
the hills. Men of that land called it Helm's Deep, after a hero of old wars
who had made his refuge there. Ever steeper and narrower it wound inward
from the north under the shadow of the Thrihyrne, till the crow-haunted
cliffs rose like mighty towers on either side, shutting out the light.

At Helm's Gate, before the mouth of the Deep, there was a heel of rock
thrust outward by the northern cliff. There upon its spur stood high walls
of ancient stone, and within them was a lofty tower. Men said that in the
far-off days of the glory of Gondor the sea-kings had built here this
fastness with the hands of giants. The Hornburg it was called, for a trumpet
sounded upon the tower echoed in the Deep behind, as if armies




long -forgotten were issuing to war from caves beneath the hills. A wall,
too, the men of old had made from the Hornburg to the southern cliff,
barring the entrance to the gorge. Beneath it by a wide culvert the
Deeping-stream passed out. About the feet of the Hornrock it wound, and
flowed then in a gully through the midst of a wide green gore, sloping
gently down from Helm's Gate to Helm's Dike. Thence it fell into the
Deeping-coomb and out into the Westfold Vale. There in the Hornburg at
Helm's Gate Erkenbrand, master of Westfold on the borders of the Mark, now
dwelt. As the days darkened with threat of war, being wise, he had repaired
the wall and made the fastness strong.

The Riders were still in the low valley before the mouth of the Coomb,
when cries and hornblasts were heard from their scouts that went in front.

Out of the darkness arrows whistled. Swiftly a scout rode back and reported
that wolf-riders were abroad in the valley, and that a host of Ores and wild
men were hurrying southward from the Fords of Isen and seemed to be
making

for Helm's Deep.

'We have found many of our folk lying slain as they fled thither,' said
the scout. 'And we have met scattered companies, going this way and that,
leaderless. What has become of Erkenbrand none seem to know. It is likely
that he will be overtaken ere he can reach Helm's Gate, if he has not
already perished.'

'Has aught been seen of Gandalf?' asked Theoden.

'Yes, lord. Many have seen an old man in white upon a horse, passing
hither and thither over the plains like wind in the grass. Some thought he
was Saruman. It is said that he went away ere nightfall towards Isengard.
Some say also that Wormtongue was seen earlier, going northward with a
company of Ores.'

'It will go ill with Wormtongue, if Gandalf comes upon him said
Theoden. 'Nonetheless I miss now both my counsellors, the old and the new.
But in this need we have no better choice than to go on, as Gandalf said, to
Helm's Gate, whether Erkenbrand be there or no. Is it known how great is the
host that comes from the North?'

'It is very great,' said the scout. 'He that flies counts every foeman
twice, yet I have spoken to stouthearted men, and I do not doubt that the
main strength of the enemy is many times as great as all that we have here.'

'Then let us be swift,' said Eomer. 'Let us drive through such foes as




are already between us and the fastness. There are caves in Helm's Deep
where hundreds may lie hid; and secret ways lead thence up on to the hills.

Trust not to secret ways,' said the king. ’Saruman has long spied out
this land. Still in that place our defence may last long. Let us go!'

Aragorn and Legolas went now with Eomer in the van. On through the dark
night they rode, ever slower as the darkness deepened and their way climbed
southward, higher and higher into the dim folds about the mountains' feet.
They found few of the enemy before them. Here and there they came upon
roving bands of Ores; but they fled ere the Riders could take or slay them.

'It will not be long I fear,' said Eomer, 'ere the coming of the king's
host will be known to the leader of our enemies, Saruman or whatever captain
he has sent forth.'

The rumour of war grew behind them. Now they could hear, borne over the
dark, the sound of harsh singing. They had climbed far up into the
Deeping-coomb when they looked back. Then they saw torches countless
points

of fiery light upon the black fields behind, scattered like red flowers, or
winding up from the lowlands in long flickering lines. Here and there a
larger blaze leapt up.

'It is a great host and follows us hard,' said Aragorn.

'They bring fire,' said Theoden, 'and they are burning as they come,
rick, cot, and tree. This was a rich vale and had many homesteads. Alas for
my folk!'

'Would that day was here and we might ride down upon them like a storm
out of the mountains!' said Aragorn. 'It grieves me to fly before them.'

'We need not fly much further,' said Eomer. 'Not far ahead now lies
Helm's Dike, an ancient trench and rampart scored across the coomb, two
furlongs below Helm's Gate. There we can turn and give battle.'

'Nay, we are too few to defend the Dike,' said Theoden. 'It is a mile
long or more, and the breach in it is wide.'

'At the breach our rearguard must stand, if we are pressed,' said
Eomer.

There was neither star nor moon when the Riders came to the breach in
the Dike, where the stream from above passed out, and the road beside it ran
down from the Hornburg. The rampart loomed suddenly before them, a high
shadow beyond a dark pit. As they rode up a sentinel challenged them.

'The Lord of the Mark rides to Helm's Gate,' Eomer answered. 'I, Eomer




son of Jomund, speak.'

This is good tidings beyond hope,' said the sentinel. 'Hasten! The
enemy is on your heels.'

The host passed through the breach and halted on the sloping sward
above. They now learned to their joy that Erkenbrand had left many men to
hold Helm's Gate, and more had since escaped thither.

'Maybe, we have a thousand fit to fight on foot,' said Gamling, an old
man, the leader of those that watched the Dike. 'But most of them have seen
too many winters, as I have, or too few, as my son's son here. What news of
Erkenbrand? Word came yesterday that he was retreating hither with all that
is left of the best Riders of Westfold. But he has not come.'

'I fear that he will not come now,' said Eomer. 'Our scouts have gained
no news of him, and the enemy fills all the valley behind us.'

'I would that he had escaped,' said Theoden. 'He was a mighty man. In
him lived again the valour of Helm the Hammerhand. But we cannot await
him

here. We must draw all our forces now behind the walls. Are you well stored?
We bring little provision, for we rode forth to open battle, not to a
siege.'

'Behind us in the caves of the Deep are three parts of the folk of
Westfold, old and young, children and women,' said Gamling. 'But great store
of food, and many beasts and their fodder, have also been gathered there.'

'That is well,' said Eomer. 'They are burning or despoiling all that is
left in the vale.'

'If they come to bargain for our goods at Helm's Gate, they will pay a
high price,' said Gamling.

The king and his Riders passed on. Before the causeway that crossed the
stream they dismounted. In a long file they led their horses up the ramp and
passed within the gates of the Hornburg. There they were welcomed again with
joy and renewed hope; for now there were men enough to man both the burg
and

the barrier wall.

Quickly Eomer set his men in readiness. The king and the men of his
household were in the Hornburg, and there also were many of the
Westfold-men. But on the Deeping Wall and its tower, and behind it, Eomer
arrayed most of the strength that he had, for here the defence seemed more
doubtful, if the assault were determined and in great force. The horses were




led far up the Deep under such guard as could be spared.

The Deeping Wall was twenty feet high, and so thick that four men could
walk abreast along the top, sheltered by a parapet over which only a tall
man could look. Here and there were clefts in the stone through which men
could shoot. This battlement could be reached by a stair running down from a
door in the outer court of the Hornburg; three flights of steps led also up
on to the wall from the Deep behind; but in front it was smooth, and the
great stones of it were set with such skill that no foothold could be found
at their joints, and at the top they hung over like a sea-delved cliff.

Gimli stood leaning against the breastwork upon the wall. Legolas sat
above on the parapet, fingering his bow, and peering out into the gloom.

This is more to my liking,' said the dwarf, stamping on the stones.

'Ever my heart rises as we draw near the mountains. There is good rock here.
This country has tough bones. I felt them in my feet as we came up from the
dike. Give me a year and a hundred of my kin and I would make this a place
that armies would break upon like water.’

’I do not doubt it,' said Legolas. 'But you are a dwarf, and dwarves
are strange folk. I do not like this place, and I shall like it no more by
the light of day. But you comfort me, Gimli, and I am glad to have you
standing nigh with your stout legs and your hard axe. I wish there were more
of your kin among us. But even more would I give for a hundred good archers
of Mirkwood. We shall need them. The Rohirrim have good bowmen after
their

fashion, but there are too few here, too few.'

'It is dark for archery,' said Gimli. 'Indeed it is time for sleep.

Sleep! I feel the need of it, as never I thought any dwarf could. Riding is
tiring work. Yet my axe is restless in my hand. Give me a row of ore-necks
and room to swing and all weariness will fall from me!'

A slow time passed. Far down in the valley scattered fires still
burned. The hosts of Isengard were advancing in silence now. Their torches
could be seen winding up the coomb in many lines.

Suddenly from the Dike yells and screams, and the fierce battle-cries
of men broke out. Flaming brands appeared over the brink and clustered
thickly at the breach. Then they scattered and vanished. Men came galloping
back over the field and up the ramp to the gate of the Hornburg. The
rearguard of the Westfolders had been driven in.

'The enemy is at hand!' they said. 'We loosed every arrow that we had,




and filled the Dike with Ores. But it will not halt them long. Already they
are scaling the bank at many points, thick as marching ants. But we have
taught them not to carry torches.'

It was now past midnight. The sky was utterly dark, and the stillness
of the heavy air foreboded storm. Suddenly the clouds were seared by a
blinding flash. Branched lightning smote down upon the eastward hills. For a
staring moment the watchers on the walls saw all the space between them and
the Dike lit with white light: it was boiling and crawling with black
shapes, some squat and broad, some tall and grim, with high helms and sable
shields. Hundreds and hundreds more were pouring over the Dike and through
the breach. The dark tide flowed up to the walls from cliff to cliff.

Thunder rolled in the valley. Rain came lashing down.

Arrows thick as the rain came whistling over the battlements, and fell
clinking and glancing on the stones. Some found a mark. The assault on
Helm's Deep had begun, but no sound or challenge was heard within; no
answering arrows came.

The assailing hosts halted, foiled by the silent menace of rock and
wall. Ever and again the lightning tore aside the darkness. Then the Ores
screamed, waving spear and sword, and shooting a cloud of arrows at any that
stood revealed upon the battlements; and the men of the Mark amazed looked
out, as it seemed to them, upon a great field of dark corn, tossed by a
tempest of war, and every ear glinted with barbed light.

Brazen trumpets sounded. The enemy surged forward, some against the
Deeping Wall, other towards the causeway and the ramp that led up to the
Hornburg-gates. There the hugest Ores were mustered, and the wild men of the
Dunland fells. A moment they hesitated and then on they came. The lightning
flashed, and blazoned upon every helm and shield the ghastly hand of
Isengard was seen: They reached the summit of the rock; they drove towards
the gates.

Then at last an answer came: a storm of arrows met them, and a hail of
stones. They wavered, broke, and fled back; and then charged again, broke
and charged again; and each time, like the incoming sea, they halted at a
higher point. Again trumpets rang, and a press of roaring men leaped forth.
They held their great shields above them like a roof, while in their midst
they bore two trunks of mighty trees. Behind them ore-archers crowded,
sending a hail of darts against the bowmen on the walls. They gained the
gates. The trees, swung by strong arms, smote the timbers with a rending




boom. If any man fell, crushed by a stone hurtling from above, two others
sprang to take his place. Again and again the great rams swung and crashed.

Eomer and Aragorn stood together on the Deeping Wall. They heard the
roar of voices and the thudding of the rams; and then in a sudden flash of
light they beheld the peril of the gates.

'Come!' said Aragorn. 'This is the hour when we draw swords together!'

Running like fire, they sped along the wall, and up the steps, and
passed into the outer court upon the Rock. As they ran they gathered a
handful of stout swordsmen. There was a small postern-door that opened in an
angle of the burg- wall on the west, where the cliff stretched out to meet
it. On that side a narrow path ran round towards the great gate, between the
wall and the sheer brink of the Rock. Together Eomer and Aragorn sprang
through the door, their men close behind. The swords flashed from the sheath
as one.

'G®thwinl!' cried Eomer. 'G®thwinl for the Mark!'

'Anduril!' cried Aragorn. 'Anduril for the D®nedain!'

Charging from the side, they hurled themselves upon the wild men.
Anduril rose and fell, gleaming with white fire. A shout went up from wall
and tower: 'Anduril! Anduril goes to war. The Blade that was Broken shines
again!'

Dismayed the rammers let fall the trees and turned to fight; but the
wall of their shields was broken as by a lightning-stroke, and they were
swept away, hewn down, or cast over the Rock into the stony stream below.
The ore-archers shot wildly and then fled.

For a moment Eomer and Aragorn halted before the gates. The thunder was
rumbling in the distance now. The lightning flickered still, far off among
the mountains in the South. A keen wind was blowing from the North again.
The clouds were torn and drifting, and stars peeped out; and above the hills
of the Coomb-side the westering moon rode, glimmering yellow in the
storm-wrack.

'We did not come too soon,' said Aragorn, looking at the gates. Their
great hinges and iron bars were wrenched and bent; many of their timbers
were cracked.

'Yet we cannot stay here beyond the walls to defend them,' said Eomer.
'Look!' He pointed to the causeway. Already a great press of Ores and Men
were gathering again beyond the stream. Arrows whined, and skipped on the
stones about them. 'Come! We must get back and see what we can do to pile




stone and beam across the gates within. Come now!'

They turned and ran. At that moment some dozen Ores that had lain
motionless among the slain leaped to their feet, and came silently and
swiftly behind. Two flung themselves to the ground at Eomer's heels, tripped
him, and in a moment they were on top of him. But a small dark figure that
none had observed sprang out of the shadows and gave a hoarse shout: Baruk
Khazad! Khazad ai-menu! An axe swung and swept back. Two Ores fell
headless.

The rest fled.

Eomer struggled to his feet, even as Aragorn ran back to his aid.

The postern was closed again, the iron door was barred and piled inside
with stones. When all were safe within, Eomer turned: ’I thank you, Gimli
son of Gluin!' he said. ’I did not know that you were with us in the sortie.

But oft the unbidden guest proves the best company. How came you there?’

’I followed you to shake off sleep,’ said Gimli; 'but I looked on the
hillmen and they seemed over large for me, so I sat beside a stone to see
your sword-play.’

’I shall not find it easy to repay you,’ said Eomer.

’There may be many a chance ere the night is over,’ laughed the Dwarf.

’But I am content. Till now I have hewn naught but wood since I left Moria.’

’Two!’ said Gimli, patting his axe. He had returned to his place on the
wall.

’Two?’ said Legolas. ’I have done better, though now I must grope for
spent arrows; all mine are gone. Yet I make my tale twenty at the least. But
that is only a few leaves in a forest.’

The sky now was quickly clearing and the sinking moon was shining
brightly. But the light brought little hope to the Riders of the Mark. The
enemy before them seemed to have grown rather than diminished, still more
were pressing up from the valley through the breach. The sortie upon the
Rock gained only a brief respite. The assault on the gates was redoubled.
Against the Deeping Wall the hosts of Isengard roared like a sea. Ores and
hillmen swarmed about its feet from end to end. Ropes with grappling hooks
were hurled over the parapet faster than men could cut them or fling them
back. Hundreds of long ladders were lifted up. Many were cast down in ruin,
but many more replaced them, and Ores sprang up them like apes in the dark
forests of the South. Before the wall’s foot the dead and broken were piled
like shingle in a storm; ever higher rose the hideous mounds, and still the




enemy came on.

The men of Rohan grew weary. All their arrows were spent, and every
shaft was shot; their swords were notched, and their shields were riven.
Three times Aragorn and Eomer rallied them, and three times Anduril flamed
in a desperate charge that drove the enemy from the wall.

Then a clamour arose in the Deep behind. Ores had crept like rats
through the culvert through which the stream flowed out. There they had
gathered in the shadow of the cliffs, until the assault above was hottest
and nearly all the men of the defence had rushed to the wall's top. Then
they sprang out. Already some had passed into the jaws of the Deep and were
among the horses, fighting with the guards.

Down from the wall leapt Gimli with a fierce cry that echoed in the
cliffs. 'Khazad! Khazad!' He soon had work enough.

'Ai-oi!' he shouted. 'The Ores are behind the wall. Ai-oi! Come,
Legolas! There are enough for us both. Khazad ai-menu!'

Gamling the Old looked down from the Hornburg, hearing the great voice
of the dwarf above all the tumult. 'The Ores are in the Deep!' he cried.
'Helm! Helm! Forth Helmingas. he shouted as he leaped down the stair from
the Rock with many men of Westfold at his back.

Their onset was fierce and sudden, and the Ores gave way before them.
Ere long they were hemmed in in the narrows of the gorge, and all were slain
or driven shrieking into the chasm of the Deep to fall before the guardians
of the hidden caves.

'Twenty -one!' cried Gimli. He hewed a two-handed stroke and laid the
last Ore before his feet. 'Now my count passes Master Legolas again.'

'We must stop this rat-hole,' said Gamling. 'Dwarves are said to be
cunning folk with stone. Lend us your aid, master!'

'We do not shape stone with battle-axes, nor with our finger-nails,'
said Gimli. 'But I will help as I may.'

They gathered such small boulders and broken stones as they could find
to hand, and under Gimli's direction the Westfold-men blocked up the inner
end of the culvert, until only a narrow outlet remained. Then the
Deeping-stream, swollen by the rain, churned and fretted in its choked path,
and spread slowly in cold pools from cliff to cliff.

'It will be drier above,' said Gimli. 'Come, Gamling, let us see how
things go on the wall!'

He climbed up and found Legolas beside Aragorn and Eomer. The elf was




whetting his long knife. There was for a while a lull in the assault, since
the attempt to break in through the culvert had been foiled.

'Twenty-one!' said Gimli.

'Good!' said Legolas. 'But my count is now two dozen. It has been
knife- work up here.'

Eomer and Aragorn leant wearily on their swords. Away on the left the
crash and clamour of the battle on the Rock rose loud again. But the
Hornburg still held fast, like an island in the sea. Its gates lay in ruin;
but over the barricade of beams and stones within no enemy as yet had
passed.

Aragorn looked at the pale stars, and at the moon, now sloping behind
the western hills that enclosed the valley. 'This is a night as long as
years,' he said. 'How long will the day tarry?'

'Dawn is not far off,' said Gamling, who had now climbed up beside him.
'But dawn will not help us, I fear.'

'Yet dawn is ever the hope of men,' said Aragorn.

'But these creatures of Isengard, these half-ores and goblin-men that
the foul craft of Saruman has bred, they will not quail at the sun,' said
Gamling. 'And neither will the wild men of the hills. Do you not hear their
voices?'

'I hear them,' said Eomer; 'but they are only the scream of birds and
the bellowing of beasts to my ears.'

'Yet there are many that cry in the Dunland tongue,' said Gamling. 'I
know that tongue. It is an ancient speech of men, and once was spoken in
many western valleys of the Mark. Hark! They hate us, and they are glad; for
our doom seems certain to them. 'The king the king!' they cry. 'We will take
their king. Death to the Forgoil! Death to the Strawheads ! Death to the
robbers of the North!' Such names they have for us. Not in half a thousand
years have they forgotten their grievance that the lords of Gondor gave the
Mark to Eorl the Young and made alliance with him. That old hatred Saruman
has inflamed. They are fierce folk when roused. They will not give way now
for dusk or dawn, until Theoden is taken, or they themselves are slain.'

'Nonetheless day will bring hope to me,' said Aragorn. 'Is it not said
that no foe has ever taken the Hornburg, if men defended it?'

'So the minstrels say,' said Eomer.

'Then let us defend it, and hope!' said Aragorn.

Even as they spoke there came a blare of trumpets. Then there was a




crash and a flash of flame and smoke. The waters of the Deeping-stream
poured out hissing and foaming: they were choked no longer, a gaping hole
was blasted in the wall. A host of dark shapes poured in.

'Devilry of Saruman!' cried Aragorn. 'They have crept in the culvert
again, while we talked, and they have lit the fire of Orthanc beneath our
feet. Elendil, Elendil!' he shouted, as he leaped down into the breach; but
even as he did so a hundred ladders were raised against the battlements.
Over the wall and under the wall the last assault came sweeping like a dark
wave upon a hill of sand. The defence was swept away. Some of the Riders
were driven back, further and further into the Deep, falling and fighting as
they gave way, step by step, towards the caves. Others cut their way back
towards the citadel.

A broad stairway, climbed from the Deep up to the Rock and the
rear-gate of the Hornburg. Near the bottom stood Aragorn. In his hand still
Anduril gleamed, and the terror of the sword for a while held back the
enemy, as one by one all who could gain the stair passed up towards the
gate. Behind on the upper steps knelt Legolas. His bow was bent, but one
gleaned arrow was all that he had left, and he peered out now, ready to
shoot the first Ore that should dare to approach the stair.

'All who can have now got safe within, Aragorn,' he called. 'Come
back!'

Aragorn turned and sped up the stair; but as he ran he stumbled in his
weariness. At once his enemies leapt forward. Up came the Ores, yelling,
with their long arms stretched out to seize him. The foremost fell with
Legolas' last arrow in his throat, but the rest sprang over him. Then a
great boulder, cast from the outer wall above, crashed down upon the stair,
and hurled them back into the Deep. Aragorn gained the door, and swiftly it
clanged to behind him.

'Things go ill, my friends,' he said, wiping the sweat from his brow
with his arm.

'Ill enough,' said Legolas, 'but not yet hopeless, while we have you
with us. Where is Gimli?'

'I do not know.' said Aragorn. 'I last saw him fighting on the ground
behind the wall, but the enemy swept us apart.'

'Alas! That is evil news,' said Legolas.

'He is stout and strong,' said Aragorn. 'Let us hope that he will
escape back to the caves. There he would be safe for a while. Safer than we.




Such a refuge would be to the liking of a dwarf.'

That must be my hope" said Legolas. 'But I wish that he had come this
way. I desired to tell Master Gimli that my tale is now thirty-nine.'

'If he wins back to the caves, he will pass your count again,' laughed
Aragorn. 'Never did I see an axe so wielded.'

'I must go and seek some arrows,' said Legolas. 'Would that this night
would end, and I could have better light for shooting.'

Aragorn now passed into the citadel. There to his dismay he learned
that Eomer had not reached the Hornburg.

'Nay, he did not come to the Rock,' said one of the Westfold-men, 'I
last saw him gathering men about him and fighting in the mouth of the Deep.
Gamling was with him, and the dwarf; but I could not come to them.'

Aragorn strode on through the inner court, and mounted to a high
chamber in the tower. There stood the king, dark against a narrow window,
looking out upon the vale.

'What is the news, Aragorn?' he said.

'The Deeping Wall is taken, lord, and all the defence swept away; but
many have escaped hither to the Rock.'

'Is Eomer here?'

'No, lord. But many of your men retreated into the Deep; and some say
that Eomer was amongst them. In the narrows they may hold back the enemy
and

come within the caves. What hope they may have then I do not know.'

'More than we. Good provision, it is said. And the air is wholesome
there because of the outlets through fissures in the rock far above. None
can force an entrance against determined men. They may hold out long.'

'But the Ores have brought a devilry from Orthanc,' said Aragorn. 'They
have a blasting fire, and with it they took the Wall. If they cannot come in
the caves, they may seal up those that are inside. But now we must turn all
our thoughts to our own defence.'

'I fret in this prison,' said Theoden. 'If I could have set a spear in
rest, riding before my men upon the field, maybe I could have felt again the
joy of battle, and so ended. But I serve little purpose here.'

'Here at least you are guarded in the strongest fastness of the Mark,'
said Aragorn. 'More hope we have to defend you in the Hornburg than in
Edoras, or even at Dunharrow in the mountains.'

'It is said that the Hornburg has never fallen to assault,' said




Theoden; 'but now my heart is doubtful. The world changes, and all that once
was strong now proves unsure. How shall any tower withstand such numbers
and

such reckless hate? Had I known that the strength of Isengard was grown so
great, maybe 1 should not so rashly have ridden forth to meet it, for all
the arts of Gandalf. His counsel seems not now so good as it did under the
morning sun.'

'Do not judge the counsel of Gandalf, until all is over, lord,' said
Aragorn.

'The end will not be long,' said the king. 'But I will not end here,
taken like an old badger in a trap. Snowmane and Hasufel and the horses of
my guard are in the inner court. When dawn comes, I will bid men sound
Helm's horn, and I will ride forth. Will you ride with me then, son of
Arathorn? Maybe we shall cleave a road, or make such an end as will be worth
a song-if any be left to sing of us hereafter.'

'I will ride with you,' said Aragorn.

Taking his leave, he returned to the walls, and passed round all their
circuit, enheartening the men, and lending aid wherever the assault was hot.
Legolas went with him. Blasts of fire leaped up from below shaking the
stones. Grappling -hooks were hurled, and ladders raised. Again and again the
Ores gained the summit of the outer wall, and again the defenders cast them
down.

At last Aragorn stood above the great gates, heedless of the darts of
the enemy. As he looked forth he saw the eastern sky grow pale. Then he
raised his empty hand, palm outward in token of parley.

The Ores yelled and jeered. 'Come down! Come down!' they cried. 'If you
wish to speak to us, come down! Bring out your king! We are the fighting
Uruk-hai. We will fetch him from his hole, if he does not come. Bring out
your skulking king!'

'The king stays or comes at his own will,' said Aragorn.

'Then what are you doing here?' they answered. 'Why do you look out? Do
you wish to see the greatness of our army? We are the fighting Uruk-hai.'

'I looked out to see the dawn,' said Aragorn.

'What of the dawn?' they jeered. 'We are the Uruk-hai: we do not stop
the fight for night or day, for fair weather or for storm. We come to kill,
by sun or moon. What of the dawn?'

'None knows what the new day shall bring him,' said Aragorn. 'Get you




gone, ere it turn to your evil.'

'Get down or we will shoot you from the wall,' they cried. 'This is no
parley. You have nothing to say.'

'I have still this to say,' answered Aragorn. 'No enemy has yet taken
the Hornburg. Depart, or not one of you will be spared. Not one will be left
alive to take back tidings to the North. You do not know your peril.'

So great a power and royalty was revealed in Aragorn, as he stood there
alone above the ruined gates before the host of his enemies, that many of
the wild men paused, and looked back over their shoulders to the valley, and
some looked up doubtfully at the sky. But the Ores laughed with loud voices;
and a hail of darts and arrows whistled over the wall, as Aragorn leaped
down.

There was a roar and a blast of fire. The archway of the gate above
which he had stood a moment before crumbled and crashed in smoke and
dust.

The barricade was scattered as if by a thunderbolt. Aragorn ran to the
king's tower.

But even as the gate fell, and the Ores about it yelled, preparing to
charge, a murmur arose behind them, like a wind in the distance, and it grew
to a clamour of many voices crying strange news in the dawn. The Ores upon
the Rock, hearing the rumour of dismay, wavered and looked back. And then,
sudden and terrible, from the tower above, the sound of the great horn of
Helm rang out.

All that heard that sound trembled. Many of the Ores cast themselves on
their faces and covered their ears with their claws. Back from the Deep the
echoes came, blast upon blast, as if on every cliff and hill a mighty herald
stood. But on the walls men looked up, listening with wonder; for the echoes
did not die. Ever the horn-blasts wound on among the hills; nearer now and
louder they answered one to another, blowing fierce and free.

'Helm! Helm!' the Riders shouted. 'Helm is arisen and comes back to
war. Helm for Theoden King!'

And with that shout the king came. His horse was white as snow, golden
was his shield, and his spear was long. At his right hand was Aragorn,
Elendil's heir, behind him rode the lords of the House of Eorl the Young.
Light sprang in the sky. Night departed.

'Forth Eorlingas!' With a cry and a great noise they charged. Down from
the gates they roared, over the causeway they swept, and they drove through




the hosts of Isengard as a wind among grass. Behind them from the Deep came
the stern cries of men issuing from the caves, driving forth the enemy. Out
poured all the men that were left upon the Rock. And ever the sound of
blowing horns echoed in the hills.

On they rode, the king and his companions. Captains and champions fell
or fled before them. Neither ore nor man withstood them. Their backs were to
the swords and spears of the Riders and their faces to the valley. They
cried and wailed, for fear and great wonder had come upon them with the
rising of the day.

So King Theoden rode from Helm's Gate and clove his path to the great
Dike. There the company halted. Light grew bright about them. Shafts of the
sun flared above the eastern hills and glimmered on their spears. But they
sat silent on their horses, and they gazed down upon the Deeping-coomb.

The land had changed. Where before the green dale had lain, its grassy
slopes lapping the ever-mounting hills, there now a forest loomed. Great
trees, bare and silent, stood, rank on rank, with tangled bough and hoary
head; their twisted roots were buried in the long green grass. Darkness was
under them. Between the Dike and the eaves of that nameless wood only two
open furlongs lay. There now cowered the proud hosts of Saruman, in terror
of the king and in terror of the trees. They streamed down from Helm's Gate
until all above the Dike was empty of them, but below it they were packed
like swarming flies. Vainly they crawled and clambered about the walls of
the coomb, seeking to escape. Upon the east too sheer and stony was the
valley's side; upon the left, from the west, their final doom approached.

There suddenly upon a ridge appeared a rider, clad in white, shining in
the rising sun. Over the low hills the horns were sounding. Behind him,
hastening down the long slopes, were a thousand men on foot; their swords
were in their hands. Amid them strode a man tall and strong. His shield was
red. As he came to the valley's brink, he set to his lips a great black horn
and blew a ringing blast.

'Erkenbrand!' the Riders shouted. 'Erkenbrand!'

'Behold the White Rider!' cried Aragorn. 'Gandalf is come again!'

'Mithrandir, Mithrandir!' said Legolas. 'This is wizardry indeed! Come!

I would look on this forest, ere the spell changes.'

The hosts of Isengard roared, swaying this way and that, turning from
fear to fear. Again the horn sounded from the tower. Down through the breach
of the Dike charged the king's company. Down from the hills leaped




Erkenbrand, lord of Westfold. Down leaped Shadowfax, like a deer that runs
surefooted in the mountains. The White Rider was upon them, and the terror
of his coming filled the enemy with madness. The wild men fell on their
faces before him. The Ores reeled and screamed and cast aside both sword and
spear. Like a black smoke driven by a mounting wind they fled. Wailing they
passed under the waiting shadow of the trees; and from that shadow none ever
came again.




Chapter 8 . The Road to Isengard



So it was that in the light of a fair morning King Theoden and Gandalf
the White Rider met again upon the green grass beside the Deeping -stream.
There was also Aragorn son of Arathorn, and Legolas the Elf, and Erkenbrand
of Westfold, and the lords of the Golden Elouse. About them were gathered the
Rohirrim, the Riders of the Mark: wonder overcame their joy in victory, and
their eyes were turned towards the wood.

Suddenly there was a great shout, and down from the Dike came those who
had been driven back into the Deep. There came Gamling the Old, and Eomer
son of Jomund, and beside them walked Gimli the dwarf. Ele had no helm,
and

about his head was a linen band stained with blood; but his voice was loud
and strong.

’Forty -two, Master Legolas!' he cried. 'Alas! My axe is notched: the
forty-second had an iron collar on his neck. How is it with you?'

'You have passed my score by one,' answered Legolas. 'But I do not
grudge you the game, so glad am I to see you on your legs!'

'Welcome, Eomer, sister-son!' said Theoden. 'Now that I see you safe, I
am glad indeed.'

'Hail, Lord of the Mark!' said Eomer. 'The dark night has passed and
day has come again. But the day has brought strange tidings.' He turned and
gazed in wonder, first at the wood and then at Gandalf. 'Once more you come
in the hour of need, unlooked-for,' he said.

'Unlooked-for?' said Gandalf. 'I said that I would return and meet you
here.'

'But you did not name the hour, nor foretell the manner of your coming.
Strange help you bring. You are mighty in wizardry, Gandalf the White!'

'That may be. But if so, I have not shown it yet. I have but given good
counsel in peril, and made use of the speed of Shadowfax. Your own valour
has done more, and the stout legs of the Westfold-men marching through the
night.'

Then they all gazed at Gandalf with still greater wonder. Some glanced
darkly at the wood, and passed their hands over their brows, as if they
thought their eyes saw otherwise than his.




Gandalf laughed long and merrily. The trees?' he said. 'Nay, I see the
wood as plainly as do you. But that is no deed of mine. It is a thing beyond
the counsel of the wise. Better than my design, and better even than my hope
the event has proved.'

'Then if not yours, whose is the wizardry?' said Theoden. 'Not
Saruman's, that is plain. Is there some mightier sage, of whom we have yet
to learn?'

'It is not wizardry, but a power far older,' said Gandalf: 'a power
that walked the earth, ere elf sang or hammer rang.

Ere iron was found or tree was hewn,

When young was mountain under moon;

Ere ring was made, or wrought was woe,

It walked the forests long ago. '

'And what may be the answer to your riddle?' said Theoden.

'If you would learn that, you should come with me to Isengard '
answered Gandalf.

'To Isengard?' they cried.

'Yes,' said Gandalf. 'I shall return to Isengard, and those who will
may come with me. There we may see strange things.'

'But there are not men enough in the Mark, not if they were all
gathered together and healed of wounds and weariness, to assault the
stronghold of Saruman,' said Theoden.

'Nevertheless to Isengard I go,' said Gandalf. 'I shall not stay there
long. My way lies now eastward. Look for me in Edoras, ere the waning of the
moon!'

'Nay!' said Theoden. 'In the dark hour before dawn I doubted, but we
will not part now. I will come with you, if that is your counsel.'

'I wish to speak with Saruman, as soon as may be now,' said Gandalf,

'and since he has done you great injury, it would be fitting if you were
there. But how soon and how swiftly will you ride?'

'My men are weary with battle,' said the King; 'and I am weary also.

For I have ridden far and slept little. Alas! My old age is not feigned nor
due only to the whisperings of Wormtongue. It is an ill that no leech can
wholly cure, not even Gandalf.'

'Then let all who are to ride with me rest now,' said Gandalf. 'We will
journey under the shadow of evening. It is as well; for it is my counsel
that all our comings and goings should be as secret as may be, henceforth.




But do not command many men to go with you, Theoden. We go to a parley
not

to a fight.'

The King then chose men that were unhurt and had swift horses, and he
sent them forth with tidings of the victory into every vale of the Mark; and
they bore his summons also, bidding all men, young and old, to come in haste
to Edoras. There the Lord of the Mark would hold an assembly of all that
could bear arms, on the second day after the full moon. To ride with him to
Isengard the King chose Eomer and twenty men of his household. With
Gandalf

would go Aragorn, and Legolas, and Gimli. In spite of his hurt the dwarf
would not stay behind.

'It was only a feeble blow and the cap turned it;' he said. 'It would
take more than such an orc-scratch to keep me back.'

'I will tend it, while you rest,' said Aragorn.

The king now returned to the Hornburg, and slept, such a sleep of quiet
as he had not known for many years, and the remainder of his chosen company
rested also. But the others, all that were not hurt or wounded, began a
great labour; for many had fallen in the battle and lay dead upon the field
or in the Deep.

No Ores remained alive; their bodies were uncounted. But a great many
of the hillmen had given themselves up; and they were afraid, and cried for
mercy.

The Men of the Mark took their weapons from them, and set them to work.

'Help now to repair the evil in which you have joined,' said
Erkenbrand; 'and afterwards you shall take an oath never again to pass the
Fords of Isen in arms, nor to march with the enemies of Men; and then you
shall go free back to your land. For you have been deluded by Saruman. Many
of you have got death as the reward of your trust in him; but had you
conquered, little better would your wages have been.'

The men of Dunland were amazed, for Saruman had told them that the men
of Rohan were cruel and burned their captives alive.

In the midst of the field before the Hornburg two mounds were raised,
and beneath them were laid all the Riders of the Mark who fell in the
defence, those of the East Dales upon one side, and those of Westfold upon
the other. In a_ grave alone under the shadow of the Hornburg lay Hama,
captain of the King's guard. He fell before the Gate.




The Ores were piled in great heaps, away from the mounds of Men, not
far from the eaves of the forest. And the people were troubled in their
minds; for the heaps of carrion were too great for burial or for burning.

They had little wood for firing, and none would have dared to take an axe to
the strange trees, even if Gandalf had not warned them to hurt neither bark
nor bough at their great peril.

'Let the Ores lie,' said Gandalf. ’The morning may bring new counsel.'

In the afternoon the King's company prepared to depart. The work of
burial was then but beginning; and Theoden mourned for the loss of Hama, his
captain, and cast the first earth upon his grave. 'Great injury indeed has
Saruman done to me and all this land,' he said; 'and I will remember it,
when we meet.'

The sun was already drawing near the hills upon the west of the Coomb,
when at last Theoden and Gandalf and their companions rode down from the
Dike. Behind them were gathered a great host, both of the Riders and of the
people of Westfold, old and young, women and children, who had come out
from

the caves. A song of victory they sang with clear voices; and then they fell
silent, wondering what would chance, for their eyes were on the trees and
they feared them.

The Riders came to the wood, and they halted; horse and man, they were
unwilling to pass in. The trees were grey and menacing, and a shadow or a
mist was about them. The ends of their long sweeping boughs hung down like
searching fingers, their roots stood up from the ground like the limbs of
strange monsters, and dark caverns opened beneath them. But Gandalf went
forward, leading the company, and where the road from the Hornburg met the
trees they saw now an opening like an arched gate under mighty boughs; and
through it Gandalf passed, and they followed him. Then to their amazement
they found that the road ran on, and the Deeping-stream beside it; and the
sky was open above and full of golden light. But on either side the great
aisles of the wood were already wrapped in dusk, stretching away into
impenetrable shadows; and there they heard the creaking and groaning of
boughs, and far cries, and a rumour of wordless voices, murmuring angrily.
No Ore or other living creature could be seen.

Legolas and Gimli were now riding together upon one horse; and they
kept close beside Gandalf, for Gimli was afraid of the wood.

'It is hot in here,' said Legolas to Gandalf. 'I feel a great wrath




about me. Do you not feel the air throb in your ears?'

’Yes,' said Gandalf.

’What has become of the miserable Ores?’ said Legolas.

’That, I think, no one will ever know,’ said Gandalf.

They rode in silence for a while; but Legolas was ever glancing from
side to side, and would often have halted to listen to the sounds of the
wood, if Gimli had allowed it.

’These are the strangest trees that ever I saw,’ he said; 'and I have
seen many an oak grow from acorn to ruinous age. I wish that there were
leisure now to walk among them: they have voices, and in time I might come
to understand their thought.’

’No, no!’ said Gimli. 'Let us leave them! I guess their thought
already: hatred of all that go on two legs; and their speech is of crushing
and strangling.’

’Not of all that go on two legs,’ said Legolas. 'There I think you are
wrong. It is Ores that they hate. For they do not belong here and know
little of Elves and Men. Far away are the valleys where they sprang. From
the deep dales of Fangorn, Gimli, that is whence they come, I guess.’

’Then that is the most perilous wood in Middle-earth,’ said Gimli. ’I
should be grateful for the part they have played, but I do not love them.

You may think them wonderful, but I have seen a greater wonder in this land,
more beautiful than any grove or glade that ever grew: my heart is still
full of ft. 'Strange are the ways of Men, Legolas ! Here they have one of the
marvels of the Northern World, and what do they say of it? Caves, they say!
Caves! Holes to fly to in time of war, to store fodder in! My good Legolas,
do you know that the caverns of Helm’s Deep are vast and beautiful? There
would be an endless pilgrimage of Dwarves, merely to gaze at them, if such
things were known to be. Aye indeed, they would pay pure gold for a brief
glance!’

’And I would give gold to be excused,’ said Legolas; 'and double to be
let out, if I strayed in!’

’You have not seen, so I forgive your jest,’ said Gimli. ’But you speak
like a fool. Do you think those halls are fair, where your King dwells under
the hill in Mirkwood, and Dwarves helped in their making long ago? They are
but hovels compared with the caverns I have seen here: immeasurable halls,
filled with an everlasting music of water that tinkles into pools, as fair
as Kheled-zvram in the starlight.




'And, Legolas, when the torches are kindled and men walk on the sandy
floors under the echoing domes, ah! then, Legolas, gems and crystals and
veins of precious ore glint in the polished walls; and the light glows
through folded marbles, shell-like, translucent as the living hands of Queen
Galadriel. There are columns of white and saffron and dawn-rose, Legolas,
fluted and twisted into dreamlike forms; they spring up from many-coloured
floors to meet the glistening pendants of the roof: wings, ropes, curtains
fine as frozen clouds; spears, banners, pinnacles of suspended palaces!

Still lakes mirror them: a glimmering world looks up from dark pools covered
with clear glass; cities, such as the mind of Durin could scarce have
imagined in his sleep, stretch on through avenues and pillared courts, on
into the dark recesses where no light can come. And plink! a silver drop
falls, and the round wrinkles in the glass make all the towers bend and
waver like weeds and corals in a grotto of the sea. Then evening comes: they
fade and twinkle out; the torches pass on into another chamber and another
dream. There is chamber after chamber, Legolas; hall opening out of hall,
dome after dome, stair beyond stair; and still the winding paths lead on
into the mountains' heart. Caves! The Caverns of Helm's Deep! Happy was the
chance that drove me there! It makes me weep to leave them.'

'Then I will wish you this fortune for your comfort, Gimli,' said the
Elf, 'that you may come safe from war and return to see them again. But do
not tell all your kindred! There seems little left for them to do, from your
account. Maybe the men of this land are wise to say little: one family of
busy dwarves with hammer and chisel might mar more than they made.'

'No, you do not understand,' said Gimli. 'No dwarf could be unmoved by
such loveliness. None of Durin's race would mine those caves for stones or
ore, not if diamonds and gold could be got there. Do you cut down groves of
blossoming trees in the spring-time for firewood? We would tend these glades
of flowering stone, not quarry them. With cautious skill, tap by tap — a
small chip of rock and no more, perhaps, in a whole anxious day — so we
could work, and as the years went by, we should open up new ways, and
display far chambers that are still dark, glimpsed only as a void beyond
fissures in the rock. And lights, Legolas! We should make lights, such lamps
as once shone in Khazad-dym; and when we wished we would drive away
the

night that has lain there since the hills were made; and when we desired
rest, we would let the night return.'




'You move me, Gimli,' said Legolas. 'I have never heard you speak like
this before. Almost you make me regret that I have not seen these caves.
Come! Let us make this bargain-if we both return safe out of the perils that
await us, we will journey for a while together. You shall visit Fangorn with
me, and then I will come with you to see Helm's Deep.'

'That would not be the way of return that I should choose,' said Gimli.

'But I will endure Fangorn, if I have your promise to come back to the caves
and share their wonder with me.'

'You have my promise,' said Legolas. 'But alas! Now we must leave
behind both cave and wood for a while: See! We are coming to the end of the
trees. How far is it to Isengard, Gandalf?'

'About fifteen leagues, as the crows of Saruman make it.' said Gandalf:

'five from the mouth of Deeping-coomb to the Fords: and ten more from there
to the gates of Isengard. But we shall not ride all the way this night.'

'And when we come there, what shall we see?' asked Gimli. 'You may
know, but I cannot guess.'

'I do not know myself for certain,' answered the wizard. 'I was there
at nightfall yesterday, but much may have happened since. Yet I think that
you will not say that the journey was in vain — not though the Glittering
Caves of Aglarond be left behind.'

At last the company passed through the trees, and found that they had
come to the bottom of the Coomb, where the road from Helm's Deep
branched,

going one way east to Edoras, and the other north to the Fords of Isen. As
they rode from under the eaves of the wood, Legolas halted and looked back
with regret. Then he gave a sudden cry.

'There are eyes!' he said. 'Eyes looking out from the shadows of the
boughs! I never saw such eyes before.'

The others, surprised by his cry, halted and turned; but Legolas
started to ride back.

'No, no!' cried Gimli. 'Do as you please in your madness, but let me
first get down from this horse! I wish to see no eyes!' 'Stay, Legolas
Greenleaf!' said Gandalf. 'Do not go back into the wood, not yet! Now is not
your time.'

Even as he spoke, there came forward out of the trees three strange
shapes. As tall as trolls they were, twelve feet or more in height; their
strong bodies, stout as young trees, seemed to be clad with raiment or with




hide of close-fitting grey and brown. Their limbs were long, and their hands
had many fingers; their hair was stiff, and their beards grey-green as moss.
They gazed out with solemn eyes, but they were not looking at the riders:
their eyes were bent northwards. Suddenly they lifted their long hands to
their mouths, and sent forth ringing calls, clear as notes of a horn, but
more musical and various. The calls were answered; and turning again, the
riders saw other creatures of the same kind approaching, striding through
the grass. They came swiftly from the North, walking like wading herons in
their gait, but not in their speed; for their legs in their long paces beat
quicker than the heron's wings. The riders cried aloud in wonder, and some
set their hands upon their sword-hilts.

'You need no weapons,' said Gandalf. 'These are but herdsmen. They are
not enemies, indeed they are not concerned with us at all.'

So it seemed to be; for as he spoke the tall creatures, without a
glance at the riders, strode into the wood and vanished.

'Herdsmen!' said Theoden. 'Where are their flocks? What are they,
Gandalf? For it is plain that to you, at any rate, they are not strange.'

'They are the shepherds of the trees,' answered Gandalf. 'Is it so long
since you listened to tales by the fireside? There are children in your land
who, out of the twisted threads of story, could pick the answer to your
question. You have seen Ents, O King, Ents out of Fangorn Forest, which in
your tongue you call the Entwood. Did you think that the name was given only
in idle fancy? Nay, Theoden, it is otherwise: to them you are but the
passing tale; all the years from Eorl the Young to Theoden the Old are of
little count to them; and all the deeds of your house but a small matter.'

The king was silent. 'Ents!' he said at length. 'Out of the shadows of
legend I begin a little to understand the marvel of the trees, I think. I
have lived to see strange days. Long we have tended our beasts and our
fields, built our houses, wrought our tools, or ridden away to help in the
wars of Minas Tirith. And that we called the life of Men, the way of the
world. We cared little for what lay beyond the borders of our land. Songs we
have that tell of these things, but we are forgetting them, teaching them
only to children, as a careless custom. And now the songs have come down
among us out of strange places, and walk visible under the Sun.'

'You should be glad, Theoden King,' said Gandalf. 'For not only the
little life of Men is now endangered, but the life also of those things
which you have deemed the matter of legend. You are not without allies, even




if you know them not.'

'Yet also I should be sad,' said Theoden. ’For however the fortune of
war shall go, may it not so end that much that was fair and wonderful shall
pass for ever out of Middle-earth?'

'It may,' said Gandalf. 'The evil of Sauron cannot be wholly cured, nor
made as if it had not been. But to such days we are doomed. Let us now go on
with the journey we have begun!'

The company turned then away from the Coomb and from the wood and
took

the road towards the Fords. Legolas followed reluctantly. The sun had set,
already it had sunk behind the rim of the world; but as they rode out from
the shadow of the hills and looked west to the Gap of Rohan the sky was
still red, and a burning light was under the floating clouds. Dark against
it there wheeled and flew many black -winged birds. Some passed overhead
with

mournful cries, returning to their homes among the rocks.

'The carrion-fowl have been busy about the battle-field,' said Eomer.

They rode now at an easy pace and dark came down upon the plains about
them. The slow moon mounted, now waxing towards the full, and in its cold
silver light the swelling grass-lands rose and fell like a wide grey sea.

They had ridden for some four hours from the branching of the roads when
they drew near to the Fords. Long slopes ran swiftly down to where the river
spread in stony shoals between high grassy terraces. Borne upon the wind
they heard the howling of wolves. Their hearts were heavy, remembering the
many men that had fallen in battle in this place.

The road dipped between rising turf-banks, carving its way through the
terraces to the river's edge, and up again upon the further side. There were
three lines of flat stepping-stones across the stream, and between them
fords for horses, that went from either brink to a bare eyot in the midst.

The riders looked down upon the crossings, and it seemed strange to them;
for the Fords had ever been a place full of the rush and chatter of water
upon stones; but now they were silent. The beds of the stream were almost
dry, a bare waste of shingles and grey sand.

'This is become a dreary place,' said Eomer. 'What sickness has
befallen the river? Many fair things Saruman has destroyed: has he devoured
the springs of Isen too?' 'So it would seem,' said Gandalf.

'Alas!' said Theoden. 'Must we pass this way, where the carrion-beasts




devour so many good Riders of the Mark?'

This is our way,' said Gandalf. 'Grievous is the fall of your men; but
you shall see that at least the wolves of the mountains do not devour them.

It is with their friends, the Ores, that they hold their feast: such indeed
is the friendship of their kind. Come!’

They rode down to the river, and as they came the wolves ceased their
howling and slunk away. Fear fell on them seeing Gandalf in the moon, and
Shadowfax his horse shining like silver. The riders passed over to the
islet, and glittering eyes watched them wanly from the shadows of the banks.

'Look!' said Gandalf. 'Friends have laboured here.’

And they saw that in the midst of the eyot a mound was piled, ringed
with stones, and set about with many spears.

’Here lie all the Men of the Mark that fell near this place,’ said
Gandalf.

'Here let them rest!' said Eomer. 'And when their spears have rotted
and rusted, long still may their mound stand and guard the Fords of Isen!'

'Is this your work also, Gandalf, my friend?' said Theoden. 'You
accomplished much in an evening and a night!'

'With the help of Shadowfax — and others,' said Gandalf. 'I rode fast
and far. But here beside the mound I will say this for your comfort: many
fell in the battles of the Fords, but fewer than rumour made them. More were
scattered than were slain; I gathered together all that I could find. Some
men I sent with Grimbold of Westfold to join Erkenbrand. Some I set to make
this burial. They have now followed your marshal, Elfhelm. I sent him with
many Riders to Edoras. Saruman I knew had despatched his full strength
against you, and his servants had turned aside from all other errands and
gone to Helm's Deep: the lands seemed empty of enemies; yet I feared that
wolf-riders and plunderers might ride nonetheless to Meduseld, while it was
undefended. But now I think you need not fear: you will find your house to
welcome your return.'

'And glad shall I be to see it again,' said Theoden, 'though brief now,

I doubt not, shall be my abiding there.'

With that the company said farewell to the island and the mound, and
passed over the river, and climbed the further bank. Then they rode on, glad
to have left the mournful Fords. As they went the howling of the wolves
broke out anew.

There was an ancient highway that ran down from Isengard to the




crossings. For some way it took its course beside the river, bending with it
east and then north; but at the last it turned away and went straight
towards the gates of Isengard; and these were under the mountain-side in the
west of the valley, sixteen miles or more from its mouth. This road they
followed but they did not ride upon it; for the ground beside it was firm
and level, covered for many miles about with short springing turf. They rode
now more swiftly, and by midnight the Fords were nearly five leagues behind.
Then they halted, ending their night's journey, for the King was weary. They
were come to the feet of the Misty Mountains, and the long arms of Nan
Curunnr stretched down to meet them. Dark lay the vale before them, for the
moon had passed into the West, and its light was hidden by the hills. But
out of the deep shadow of the dale rose a vast spire of smoke and vapour; as
it mounted, it caught the rays of the sinking moon, and spread in shimmering
billows, black and silver, over the starry sky.

’What do you think of that, Gandalf?' asked Aragorn. 'One would say
that all the Wizard's Vale was burning.'

'There is ever a fume above that valley in these days,' said Eomer:

'but I have never seen aught like this before. These are steams rather than
smokes. Saruman is brewing some devilry to greet us. Maybe he is boiling all
the waters of Isen, and that is why the river runs dry.'

'Maybe he is,' said Gandalf. 'Tomorrow we shall learn what he is doing.
Now let us rest for a while, if we can.'

They camped beside the bed of the Isen river; it was still silent and
empty. Some of them slept a little. But late in the night the watchmen cried
out, and all awoke. The moon was gone. Stars were shining above; but over
the ground there crept a darkness blacker than the night. On both sides of
the river it rolled towards them, going northward.

'Stay where you are!' said Gandalf. 'Draw no weapons! Wait! and it will
pass you by!'

A mist gathered about them. Above them a few stars still glimmered
faintly; but on either side there arose walls of impenetrable gloom; they
were in a narrow lane between moving towers of shadow. Voices they heard,
whisperings and groanings and an endless rustling sigh; the earth shook
under them. Long it seemed to them that they sat and were afraid; but at
last the darkness and the rumour passed, and vanished between the mountain's
arms.

Away south upon the Hornburg, in the middle night men heard a great




noise, as a wind in the valley, and the ground trembled; and all were afraid
and no one ventured to go forth. But in the morning they went out and were
amazed; for the slain Ores were gone, and the trees also. Far down into the
valley of the Deep the grass was crushed and trampled brown, as if giant
herdsmen had pastured great droves of cattle there; but a mile below the
Dike a huge pit had been delved in the earth, and over it stones were piled
into a hill. Men believed that the Ores whom they had slain were buried
there; but whether those who had fled into the wood were with them, none
could say, for no man ever set foot upon that hill. The Death Down it was
afterwards called, and no grass would grow there. But the strange trees were
never seen in Deeping-coomb again; they had returned at night, and had gone
far away to the dark dales of Fangorn. Thus they were revenged upon the
Ores.

The king and his company slept no more that night; but they saw and
heard no other strange thing, save one: the voice of the river beside them
suddenly awoke. There was a rush of water hurrying down among the stones;
and when it had passed, the Isen flowed and bubbled in its bed again, as it
had ever done.

At dawn they made ready to go on. The light came grey and pale, and
they did not see the rising of the sun. The air above was heavy with fog,
and a reek lay on the land about them. They went slowly, riding now upon the
highway. It was broad and hard, and well-tended. Dimly through the mists
they could descry the long arm of the mountains rising on their left. They
had passed into Nan Curunnr, the Wizard's Vale. That was a sheltered valley,
open only to the South. Once it had been fair and green, and through it the
Isen flowed, already deep and strong before it found the plains; for it was
fed by many springs and lesser streams among the rain-washed hills, and all
about it there had lain a pleasant, fertile land.

It was not so now. Beneath the walls of Isengard there still were acres
tilled by the slaves of Saruman; but most of the valley had become a
wilderness of weeds and thorns. Brambles trailed upon the ground, or
clambering over bush and bank, made shaggy caves where small beasts
housed.

No trees grew there; but among the rank grasses could still be seen the
burned and axe-hewn stumps of ancient groves. It was a sad country, silent
now but for the stony noise of quick waters. Smokes and steams drifted in
sullen clouds and lurked in the hollows. The riders did not speak. Many




doubted in their hearts, wondering to what dismal end their journey led.

After they had ridden for some miles, the highway became a wide street,
paved with great flat stones, squared and laid with skill; no blade of grass
was seen in any joint. Deep gutters, filled with trickling water, ran down
on either side. Suddenly a tall pillar loomed up before them. It was black;
and set upon it was a great stone, carved and painted in the likeness of a
long White Hand. Its finger pointed north. Not far now they knew that the
gates of Isengard must stand, and their hearts were heavy; but their eyes
could not pierce the mists ahead.

Beneath the mountain's arm within the Wizard's Vale through years
uncounted had stood that ancient place that Men called Isengard. Partly it
was shaped in the making of the mountains, but mighty works the Men of
Westernesse had wrought there of old; and Saruman had dwelt there long and
had not been idle.

This was its fashion, while Saruman was at his height, accounted by
many the chief of Wizards. A great ring-wall of stone, like towering cliffs,
stood out from the shelter of the mountain- side, from which it ran and then
returned again. One entrance only was there made in it, a great arch delved
in the southern wall. Here through the black rock a long tunnel had been
hewn, closed at either end with mighty doors of iron. They were so wrought
and poised upon their huge hinges, posts of steel driven into the living
stone, that when unbarred they could be moved with a light thrust of the
arms, noiselessly. One who passed in and came at length out of the echoing
tunnel, beheld a plain, a great circle, somewhat hollowed like a vast
shallow bowl: a mile it measured from rim to rim. Once it had been green and
filled with avenues, and groves of fruitful trees, watered by streams that
flowed from the mountains to a lake. But no green thing grew there in the
latter days of Saruman. The roads were paved with stone-flags, dark and
hard; and beside their borders instead of trees there marched long lines of
pillars, some of marble, some of copper and of iron, joined by heavy chains.

Many houses there were, chambers, halls, and passages, cut and
tunnelled back into the walls upon their inner side, so that all the open
circle was overlooked by countless windows and dark doors. Thousands could
dwell there, workers, servants, slaves, and warriors with great store of
arms; wolves were fed and stabled in deep dens beneath. The plain, too, was
bored and delved. Shafts were driven deep into the ground; their upper ends
were covered by low mounds and domes of stone, so that in the moonlight the




Ring of Isengard looked like a graveyard of unquiet dead. For the ground
trembled. The shafts ran down by many slopes and spiral stairs to caverns
far under; there Saruman had treasuries, store-houses, armouries, smithies,
and great furnaces. Iron wheels revolved there endlessly, and hammers
thudded. At night plumes of vapour steamed from the vents, lit from beneath
with red light, or blue, or venomous green.

To the centre all the roads ran between their chains. There stood a
tower of marvellous shape. It was fashioned by the builders of old, who
smoothed the Ring of Isengard, and yet it seemed a thing not made by the
craft of Men, but riven from the bones of the earth in the ancient torment
of the hills. A peak and isle of rock it was. black and gleaming hard: four
mighty piers of many-sided stone were welded into one, but near the summit
they opened into gaping horns, their pinnacles sharp as the points of
spears, keen-edged as knives. Between them was a narrow space, and there
upon a floor of polished stone, written with strange signs, a man might
stand five hundred feet above the plain. This was Orthanc, the citadel of
Saruman, the name of which had (by design or chance) a twofold meaning; for
in the Elvish speech orthanc signifies Mount Fang, but in the language of
the Mark of old the Cunning Mind.

A strong place and wonderful was Isengard, and long it had been
beautiful; and there great lords had dwelt, the wardens of Gondor upon the
West, and wise men that watched the stars. But Saruman had slowly shaped it
to his shifting purposes, and made it better, as he thought, being
deceived-for all those arts and subtle devices, for which he forsook his
former wisdom, and which fondly he imagined were his own. came but
from

Mordor; so that what he made was naught, only a little copy, a child's model
or a slave's flattery, of that vast fortress, armoury, prison, furnace of
great power, Barad-dur, the Dark Tower, which suffered no rival, and laughed
at flattery, biding its time, secure in its pride and its immeasurable
strength.

This was the stronghold of Saruman, as fame reported it; for within
living memory the men of Rohan had not passed its gates, save perhaps a few,
such as Wormtongue, who came in secret and told no man what they saw.

Now Gandalf rode to the great pillar of the Hand, and passed it: and as
he did so the Riders saw to their wonder that the Hand appeared no longer
white. It was stained as with dried blood; and looking closer they perceived




that its nails were red. Unheeding Gandalf rode on into the mist, and
reluctantly they followed him. All about them now, as if there had been a
sudden flood, wide pools of water lay beside the road, filling the hollows,
and rills went trickling down among the stones.

At last Gandalf halted and beckoned to them; and they came, and saw
that beyond him the mists had cleared, and a pale sunlight shone. The hour
of noon had passed. They were come to the doors of Isengard.

But the doors lay hurled and twisted on the ground. And all about,
stone, cracked and splintered into countless jagged shards, was scattered
far and wide, or piled in ruinous heaps. The great arch still stood, but it
opened now upon a roofless chasm: the tunnel was laid bare, and through the
cliff-like walls on either side great rents and breaches had been torn;
their towers were beaten into dust. If the Great Sea had risen in wrath and
fallen on the hills with storm, it could have worked no greater ruin.

The ring beyond was filled with steaming water: a bubbling cauldron, in
which there heaved and floated a wreckage of beams and spars, chests and
casks and broken gear. Twisted and leaning pillars reared their splintered
stems above the flood, but all the roads were drowned. Far off, it seemed,
half veiled in winding cloud, there loomed the island rock. Still dark and
tall, unbroken by the storm, the tower of Orthanc stood. Pale waters lapped
about its feet.

The king and all his company sat silent on their horses, marvelling,
perceiving that the power of Saruman was overthrown; but how they could not
guess. And now they turned their eyes towards the archway and the ruined
gates. There they saw close beside them a great rubble-heap; and suddenly
they were aware of two small figures lying on it at their ease, grey-clad,
hardly to be seen among the stones. There were bottles and bowls and
platters laid beside them, as if they had just eaten well, and now rested
from their labour. One seemed asleep; the other, with crossed legs and arms
behind his head, leaned back against a broken rock and sent from his mouth
long wisps and little rings of thin blue smoke.

For a moment Theoden and Eomer and all his men stared at them in
wonder. Amid all the wreck of Isengard this seemed to them the strangest
sight. But before the king could speak, the small smoke-breathing figure
became suddenly aware of them, as they sat there silent on the edge of the
mist. He sprang to his feet. A young man he looked, or like one, though not
much more than half a man in height; his head of brown curling hair was




uncovered, but he was clad in a travel-stained cloak of the same hue and
shape as the companions of Gandalf had worn when they rode to Edoras. He
bowed very low. putting his hand upon his breast. Then, seeming not to
observe the wizard and his friends, he turned to Eomer and the king.

'Welcome, my lords, to Isengard!' he said. 'We are the doorwardens.
Meriadoc, son of Saradoc is my name; and my companion, who, alas! is
overcome with weariness' — here he gave the other a dig with his foot —

'is Peregrin, son of Paladin, of the house of Took. Far in the North is our
home. The Lord Saruman is within; but at the moment he is closeted with one
Wormtongue, or doubtless he would be here to welcome such honourable
guests.'

'Doubtless he would!' laughed Gandalf. 'And was it Saruman that ordered
you to guard his damaged doors, and watch for the arrival of guests, when
your attention could be spared from plate and bottle?'

'No, good sir, the matter escaped him,' answered Merry gravely 'He has
been much occupied. Our orders came from Treebeard, who has taken over
the

management of Isengard. He commanded me to welcome the Lord of Rohan
with

fitting words. I have done my best.'

'And what about your companions? What about Legolas and me?' cried
Gimli, unable to contain himself longer. 'You rascals, you woolly-footed and
wool-pated truants ! A fine hunt you have led us! Two hundred leagues,
through fen and forest, battle and death, to rescue you ! And here we find
you feasting and idling -and smoking ! Smoking! Where did you come by the
weed, you villains? Hammer and tongs! I am so torn between rage and joy,
that if I do not burst, it will be a marvel!'

'You speak for me, Gimli,' laughed Legolas. 'Though I would sooner
learn how they came by the wine.'

'One thing you have not found in your hunting, and that's brighter
wits,' said Pippin, opening an eye. 'Here you find us sitting on a field of
victory, amid the plunder of armies, and you wonder how we came by a few
well-earned comforts!'

'Well-earned?' said Gimli. 'I cannot believe that!'

The Riders laughed. 'It cannot be doubted that we witness the meeting
of dear friends,' said Theoden. 'So these are the lost ones of your company,
Gandalf? The days are fated to be filled with marvels. Already I have seen




many since I left my house; and now here before my eyes stand yet another of
the folk of legend. Are not these the Halflings, that some among us call the
Holbytlan?'

'Hobbits, if you please, lord,' said Pippin.

'Hobbits?' said Theoden. 'Your tongue is strangely changed; but the
name sounds not unfitting so. Hobbits! No report that I have heard does
justice to the truth.'

Merry bowed; and Pippin got up and bowed low. 'You are gracious, lord;
or I hope that I may so take your words,' he said. 'And here is another
marvel! I have wandered in many lands, since I left my home, and never till
now have I found people that knew any story concerning hobbits.'

'My people came out of the North long ago,' said Theoden. 'But I will
not deceive you: we know no tales about hobbits. All that is said among us
is that far away, over many hills and rivers, live the halfling folk that
dwell in holes in sand-dunes. But there are no legends of their deeds, for
it is said that they do little, and avoid the sight of men, being able to
vanish in a twinkling: and they can change their voices to resemble the
piping of birds. But it seems that more could be said.'

'It could indeed, lord,' said Merry.

'For one thing,' said Theoden, 'I had not heard that they spouted smoke
from their mouths.'

'That is not surprising,' answered Merry; 'for it is an art which we
have not practised for more than a few generations. It was Tobold
Hornblower, of Longbottom in the Southfarthing, who first grew the true
pipe-weed in his gardens, about the year 1070 according to our reckoning.
How old Toby came by the plant...'

'You do not know your danger, Theoden,' interrupted Gandalf. 'These
hobbits will sit on the edge of ruin and discuss the pleasures of the table,
or the small doings of their fathers, grandfathers, and great-grandfathers,
and remoter cousins to the ninth degree, if you encourage them with undue
patience. Some other time would be more fitting for the history of smoking.
Where is Treebeard, Merry?'

'Away on the north side, I believe. He went to get a drink-of clean
water. Most of the other Ents are with him, still busy at their work — over
there.' Merry waved his hand towards the steaming lake; and as they looked,
they heard a distant rumbling and rattling, as if an avalanche was falling
from the mountain-side. Far away came a hoom-hom, as of horns blowing




triumphantly.

'And is Orthanc then left unguarded?' asked Gandalf.

'There is the water,' said Merry. 'But Quickbeam and some others are
watching it. Not all those posts and pillars in the plain are of Saruman's
planting. Quickbeam, I think, is by the rock, near the foot of the stair.'

'Yes, a tall grey Ent is there,' said Legolas, 'but his arms are at his
sides, and he stands as still as a door -tree.'

'It is past noon,' said Gandalf, 'and we at any rate have not eaten
since early morning. Yet I wish to see Treebeard as soon as may be. Did he
leave me no message, or has plate and bottle driven it from your mind?'

'He left a message,' said Merry, 'and I was coming to it, but I have
been hindered by many other questions. I was to say that, if the Lord of the
Mark and Gandalf will ride to the northern wall they will find Treebeard
there, and he will welcome them. I may add that they will also find food of
the best there, it was discovered and selected by your humble servants.' He
bowed.

Gandalf laughed. 'That is better!' he said. 'Well, Theoden. will you
ride with me to find Treebeard? We must go round about, but it is not far.
When you see Treebeard, you will learn much. For Treebeard is Fangorn, and
the eldest and chief of the Ents, and when you speak with him you will hear
the speech of the oldest of all living things.'

'I will come with you,' said Theoden. 'Farewell, my hobbits! May we
meet again in my house ! There you shall sit beside me and tell me all that
your hearts desire: the deeds of your grandsires, as far as you can reckon
them; and we will speak also of Tobold the Old and his herb-lore. Farewell!'

The hobbits bowed low. 'So that is the King of Rohan!' said Pippin in
an undertone. 'A fine old fellow. Very polite.'